# Framework scope

## 1. Types of projects you want to support

I am a data scientist and machine learning engineer specilized in ecology, biodiversity, conservation and now with a strong focus on nature finance.

I work in these main broad topics and will list more specific examples of the type of work I will pursue in each of them:

### Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based conservation planning

One of my main focuses. 

- Develop DRL models that tackle the spatial optimization aspect of spatial conservation decisions check this paper: [Connectivity conservation planning through deep reinforcement learning](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/2041-210X.14300). Instead of using e.g. [Marxan](https://marxansolutions.org/).

### Bioacoustics

- Large-scale detection and classification of animals (birds, bats, etc) in sound files (audible and ultrasonic) using machine learning models such as [BirdNET](https://github.com/birdnet-team/BirdNET-Analyzer) and [perch](https://github.com/google-research/perch) and [batdetect2](https://github.com/macaodha/batdetect2).
- Large-scale processing of (audible) sound files to produce (eco)acoustic indices. [Important reference](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/2041-210x.70285) stating that they are not useful. And store them in as time series in a specialized database such as questDB.
- Large-scale processing of (audible) sound files to produce embeddings (both with BirdNET and perch). And store them in as time series in a specialized database such as questDB.
- Sampling design to optain cost-effective samples from large batches of detected animal signals in sound files to be checked by human experts.
- Developing a validation protocol and pipeline for checking machine learning based animal detections, for example using open source apps like [whombat](https://github.com/mbsantiago/whombat/). QuestDB should also store the information generated by the validation procedures.
- Training new simple but locally tailored classifiers using model embeddings and possibly other variables such as model confidence scores, geo-spatial information, etc. 

Main programming language: python

### Camera trapping surveys

Since I don't currently participate here very actively I just mentioned it without full detail.

- Detection and classification of animals in digital photographs and videos using machine learnig models such as [megadetector](https://github.com/agentmorris/MegaDetector).
- Developing a validation protocol and a pipeline to execute it, in a way analogous to the described work in the bioacoustics section.
- Train custom animal classifiers using different neural net architectures.

Main programming language: python

### Remote sensing

- Acquisition of satellite imagery using different apis and storages (e.g. s3 buckets) and even, perhaps, [google earth engine](https://earthengine.google.com/) to be stored on our cloud or system of choice for processing down the road.
- Preprocessing of imagery as needed, e.g. quality control, cloud, shadow, etc masking.
- Generation of image composites of choice (e.g. a yearly median of NDVI)
- Generation of training data for different scenarios, such as for land cover classification or for biomass or tree height estimation.
- Fitting machine learning models for classification and regression (e.g. for biomass estimation)
- Accuracy analyses and iterative improvement of models
- All this with logging and designed to scale as much as needed with tiny docker workers and be cloud and system agnostic.

Main programming language: python

### Ecological modelling

- Sampling design to deploy bioacoustic recorders and camera traps in the field
- Animal species distribution and occupancy modelling
- Functional diversity analysis (we have pipelines to obtain animal traits that could be further developed)
- Habitat connectivity analysis using animal information (e.g. from literature) and our land cover maps. 
- Biodiversity baseline creation
- Automated reporting pipelines developed mostly in R using the officeR package and rmarkdown/quarto.

Main programming language: R

## 2. Typical outputs (very important)

Artifact layer.

- CSV / parquet datasets even though we will try to not and focus more on reading tables from e.g. our proposed questDB, some CSV and parquet files will be inevitable.
- Trained models, such as our metioned acoustic classifiers based on embeddings or our models to perform land cover classification or biomass estimation.
- Experiment logging and a diverse set of evaluation metrics (our models can have quite different natures and thus need very different metrics)
- Beautiful visualizations, but locally to be added to presentations, documents or in local html files.
- Json files that have data to create dashboards and webapps but I would not develop those, I would simply feed them in some way, e.g. populating a database.
- Datasets for human annotation

## 3. Scale of your projects

Infra + tooling decisions.

- small (single machine, few GB), 60% of the time
- medium (10–100GB, some batching), 10% of the time
- large (cloud pipelines, distributed), 30% of the time (e.g. each of our projects require the procesing of terabytes of soundfiles. but only once per project)

## 4. Collaboration style

how heavy we go on structure and reviews?

- Solo, 70% 
- Small team (2 others), 30% of the time, (I would want a place to define if the project is solo or not)

## 5. Infrastructure

I expect to use:

- local machine
- HPC cluster (uses SLURM)
- AWS
- Google Cloud
- Docker
- Terraform
- Airflow / Prefect / similar
- databases (postgres-postgis, sqlite, questDB, mongoDB)
- object storage (S3, GCS, HPC storage such as LUSTRE)

## 6. Pain points you want to fix

- Messy code, little to no documentation, id like to move towards making small (e.g. python)packages I can 'pip install' if even for my personal use.
- Bad coding practices, would want to impose rules that help my code move towards industry level code
- Air tight unit testing from the beginning
- Need for absolute reproducibility and sharing the code (again good documentation, readable code)
- Seamless, hassle free, scalability for the processing pipelines (mostly bioacoustics and remote sensing work)
- And one of the most important, if not the most important focus, minimizing the costs of data processing, e.g. cloud computing costs (is it cheaper to download imagery from S3 or process everything on google earth engine? those types of analyses and decisions) 
